Sync Merge: update-workshop-to-c5 (#797)
espressif/developer-portal: content/workshops/esp-idf-with-esp32-c5/_index.md

> ---

Reviewer: Are you going to create a featured image for this workshop?

Reviewer 2: Not sure, I think it'd be best to have it similar to the C6 workshop for consistency. Maybe just changing the colors a bit? Maybe it's best if Kosta decides.

  * [Assignment 2.1](assignment-2-1/) – Read the current partition table and switch to a scheme with two OTA app partitions
  * [Assignment 2.2](assignment-2-2/) – Build a custom partition table that adds a `spiffs` filesystem partition, then flash and verify it

* Part 3: **OTA**

  * [Lecture 3](lecture-3/) – How Over-The-Air updates work on Espressif devices using the `app_update` and `esp_https_ota` components
  * [Assignment 3.1](assignment-3-1/) – Configure the partition table for OTA and perform a single OTA update by downloading new firmware from a fixed URL with `esp_https_ota`
  * [Assignment 3.2](assignment-3-2/) – Check a remote version file before updating, so the device only downloads new firmware when it is actually newer

* Part 4: **Extra ULP**

  * [Lecture 4](lecture-4/) – The ESP32-C5's sleep modes and the Ultra Low Power (ULP) LP core coprocessor
  * [Assignment 4.1](assignment-4-1/) – Build a Deep-sleep example that wakes on the RTC timer and keeps a boot counter in RTC memory
  * [Assignment 4.2](assignment-4-2/) – Run a program on the LP core that counts while the main CPU sleeps and wakes it at a threshold

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer: Please move the `## Prerequisites` before the `## Agenda`.

To follow this workshop, make sure you meet the prerequisites listed below.

### Required Software

* **VS Code** installed on your computer (v1.108+)
* **[ESP-IDF extension for VS Code](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/vscode-esp-idf-extension/en/latest/)** added to VS Code (v1.11+)
* **ESP-IDF** installed on your machine (__>v5.5,<6__)
  *It can be installed via VS Code or by using the [ESP-IDF Installation Manager](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/idf-im-ui/en/latest/index.html)*

To install everything, you can follow the [ESP-IDF Setup guide](/workshops/esp-idf-setup/).

### Required Hardware

> * An `ESP32-C5-DevKitC-1` development board. <br>

Reviewer: Add the link to the devkit docs.
https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-dev-kits/en/latest/esp32c5/esp32-c5-devkitc-1/index.html

Building on that, the third part covers Over-The-Air (OTA) updates, so you can update your firmware remotely without a physical connection to the board.

The fourth part introduces the low-power modes and the ULP, a low-power RISC-V coprocessor that can handle simple tasks on its own while the main CPU stays in deep sleep, helping you save power in battery-operated designs.

By the end of the workshop, you will be able to build an application that connects over Wi-Fi 6, manages its own partitions, updates itself remotely through OTA, and offloads background work to the Extra ULP coprocessor.

{{< alert icon="circle-info" cardColor="#b3e0f2" iconColor="#04a5e5">}}
Estimated duration: 3 hours.
{{< /alert >}}

## Prerequisites

To follow this workshop, make sure you meet the prerequisites listed below.

### Required Software

* **VS Code** installed on your computer (v1.108+)
* **[ESP-IDF extension for VS Code](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/vscode-esp-idf-extension/en/latest/)** added to VS Code (v1.11+)

> * **ESP-IDF** installed on your machine (__>v5.5,<6__)

Reviewer 3: > >v5.5,<6

This looks a bit confusing. Should we say `v5.5.x` instead or use more verbal description?

  *It can be installed via VS Code or by using the [ESP-IDF Installation Manager](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/idf-im-ui/en/latest/index.html)*

To install everything, you can follow the [ESP-IDF Setup guide](/workshops/esp-idf-setup/).

### Required Hardware

* An [`ESP32-C5-DevKitC-1`](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-dev-kits/en/latest/esp32c5/esp32-c5-devkitc-1/index.html) development board. <br>
  *If the activity is in person, the board will be provided during the workshop.*

### About the ESP32-C5-DevKitC-1

The `ESP32-C5-DevKitC-1` is an entry-level development board built around the `ESP32-C5-WROOM-1` module. It breaks out most of the SoC's GPIO pins to headers on both sides of the board, so you can easily connect it to a breadboard or to peripherals using jumper wires.

> The board includes a USB Type-C to UART port, used both to power the board and to flash and monitor your application, and a second, dedicated USB Type-C port wired directly to the SoC for native USB communication and JTAG debugging.

Reviewer 3: This information is much easier to internalize if structured a bit more:

```suggestion
The board includes two USB Type-C ports:

- USB Type-C to UART port used both to power the board and to flash and monitor your application.
- Dedicated USB Type-C port wired directly to the SoC for native USB communication and JTAG debugging.
```

#### ESP32-C5 SoC Main Characteristics

The `ESP32-C5` is the SoC at the heart of this development board. Its main characteristics are:

* __CPU__: 32-bit single-core RISC-V processor, clocked up to 240 MHz, plus a low-power (LP) RISC-V core for always-on tasks.

> * __Memory__: 384 KB of on-chip HP SRAM, 16 KB of LP SRAM, and 320 KB of ROM, with support for external flash and PSRAM.

Reviewer 3: It is the first time I see the terms `HP SRAM` and `LP SRAM`. Would this alphabet soup be confusing for participants? Should we mention what HP and LP means?

If yes, maybe it is worth creating a sublist with all memory types.

* Part 2: **Partition Table**

  * [Lecture 2](lecture-2/) – The ESP-IDF partition table, its typical entries, and how to select a built-in scheme through `menuconfig`
  * [Assignment 2.1](assignment-2-1/) – Read the current partition table and switch to a scheme with two OTA app partitions
  * [Assignment 2.2](assignment-2-2/) – Build a custom partition table that adds a `spiffs` filesystem partition, then flash and verify it

* Part 3: **OTA**

  * [Lecture 3](lecture-3/) – How Over-The-Air updates work on Espressif devices using the `app_update` and `esp_https_ota` components
  * [Assignment 3.1](assignment-3-1/) – Configure the partition table for OTA and perform a single OTA update by downloading new firmware from a fixed URL with `esp_https_ota`
  * [Assignment 3.2](assignment-3-2/) – (Optional) Add app rollback support, so a broken firmware update is automatically reverted to the last working version
  * [Assignment 3.3](assignment-3-3/) – Check a remote version file before updating, so the device only downloads new firmware when it is actually newer

> * Part 4: **Extra ULP**

Reviewer 3: Why is it `Extra ULP`? What exactly _extra_ mean here?
